Author: 
Date: 15/05/2014
Summary: After boarding a United Airlines aircraft, waiting your turn to shamble down the cramped aisles, overhead pressing your engorged carry on into the overhead compartment, and settling down in your assigned seat with the hope of finally being able to relax, you may find yourself greeted by the fleshy faces of old white men animatedly expressing urgent political opinions at you from an 8-inch screen positioned directly in front of your face.
Title: TV Screens on Airplanes

After boarding a United Airlines aircraft, waiting your turn to shamble down the cramped aisles, overhead pressing your engorged carry on into the overhead compartment, and settling down in your assigned seat with the hope of finally being able to relax, you may find yourself greeted by the fleshy faces of old white men animatedly expressing urgent political opinions at you from an 8-inch screen positioned directly in front of your face. It’s what I encountered when trying to fly from Seattle to Orlando last winter.

Imagine my surprise when, sitting down into the seat that was to become my airborne cradle for the next four hours, I beheld a room of newscasters theatrically debating the President's actions in muted silence. The show's title, FACE THE NATION, which was not only displayed in all caps on the bottom left of the screen, but also printed on the oligarchic figures' matching coffee mugs seemed especially poetic considering my confined state.
Face the nation. Certainly, I had no choice.

I eventually found a way to turn off the screen (the dimmer button, when taken to it’s extreme, usually works), but was appalled when it roared back to life after the safety demonstration to display another United Airlines commercial spot. It continued to do this throughout the flight – me turning it off, and it coming back to life to show me the same 2014 Olympics United Airlines spot.

Travelling by plane nowadays is an experience in the worst aspects of American culture. After having your privacy invaded at the security checkpoints, you are let loose into a monotonous causeway of branded storefronts. Furthermore, with frequent delays, even your freedom to determine how much time you spend in these gaudy surroundings is lost. With the inclusion of these seat-mounted TV screens, the last vestige of privacy, seclusion, and nobility is being invaded.

Granted, these screens can be a welcome sight to the traveler who does not bring his own entertainment, and I can understand how many passengers would prefer the mind-dulling pleasure of scanning through the latest episodes of Modern Family to the meditative, but frustrating and mind-dulling experience of trying to sleep in an airline seat. However, I have noticed that the degree to which these screens are enjoyable is directly proportional to how much control one has over them. Indeed, on a recent Air Canada flight, said screen became my fast friend due to its vast library of free movies and music (Bright Eyes? How swell) and its limited commercial interruptions. Airlines should keep in mind the incredible anxiety that can be created when people aren't able to maintain a small degree of control over their surroundings (how much do you think I was able to recline in this chair?). Also, its time they put more outlets in planes. There is a unique sense of doom that is created when you realize you're sitting down for a nine hour flight and you only have 30 minutes of battery life on your laptop.
